Duplicate entries may inadvertently accumulate in databases, which are crucial for storing vast amounts of structured data. These duplicates could show up for a number of reasons, including system errors, data migration mistakes, or repeated user submissions. A database with duplicate entries may experience irregularities, sluggish performance, and erroneous reporting. Using the GROUP BY and HAVING clauses, as well as a different strategy that makes use of temporary tables, we will discuss two efficient methods for locating and removing duplicate rows in MySQL. With these techniques, you can be sure that your data will always be accurate, clean, and well-organized.
Database duplication in MySQL tables can clog your data, resulting in inaccurate analytics and needless storage. Locating and eliminating them is a crucial database upkeep task. This is a detailed guide on how to identify and remove duplicate rows.
If two or more columns in a row have identical values, it is called a duplicate row. For instance, rows that have the same values in both the userName and userEmail columns of a userDetails table may be considered duplicates.

Prerequisites
Prior to starting, make sure you have access to a MySQL database or have MySQL installed on your computer. The fundamentals of general database concepts and SQL queries. One can execute SQL commands by having access to a MySQL client or command-line interface.
Configuring a Sample Database and Table To gain practical experience, you can construct a sample database and table that contains duplicate records so that you can test and comprehend the techniques for eliminating them.

After entering your MySQL credentials, use the command above to create a new database called test_dev_db. Then, switch to this newly created database:.
USE test_db;
Add several rows, including duplicates, to the userDetails table after creating it with the CREATE TABLE Query and INSERT sql query below.

Group By and HAVING to Find Duplicates Grouping rows according to duplicate-defining columns and using HAVING to filter groups with more than one record . is the simplest method for finding duplicates. Now that you have duplicate data, you can use SQL to determine which rows contain duplicate entries. MySQL's GROUP BY and HAVING clauses make this process easier by enabling you to count instances of each distinct value. An example of a table structure is the userDetails table, which contains the columns userId, userName, and userEmail. The GROUP BY Clause is useful for counting occurrences and identifying duplicates because it groups records according to specified column values. HAVING Clause: This filter allows duplicate entries in groups formed by GROUP BY to be found by combining groups based on specific criteria.

In above table userDetails, records with identical userName and userEmail values are considered duplicates.
Query for find the duplicate entries
Rows are grouped by username and userEmail in the aforementioned query, which also counts entries within the group and eliminates groups with a single entry (no duplicates).

This query will return groups of duplicate records based on the selected columns.

Eliminating Duplicate Rows: After finding duplicates, you may need to eliminate some records while keeping the unique ones. Joining the table to itself and removing rows with higher userId values is one effective method that preserves the lowest userId for every duplicate.
Use the SQL Query to Remove Duplicates to remove duplicate rows while keeping the lowest userId entry.
Confirming Duplicate Removal

Verifying the Erasure of Duplicates and to confirm that all duplicates have been removed, repeat the Step 1 identification query.

Significant Benefits of Employing GROUP BY and HAVING
The GROUP BY and HAVING clauses serve as vital instruments for the aggregation of data and the filtration of grouped outcomes. These functionalities are especially useful for detecting and handling duplicate entries or for condensing extensive datasets. Below are the primary benefits of employing these clauses.

Efficient Identification of Duplicates
Data Aggregation and Summarization
Filtering Aggregated Results with Precision
Versatility Across Multiple Scenarios
Compatibility and Simplicity
Enhanced Query Readability
Support for Complex Aggregations


Another approach is to use a Temporary Table for Duplicates.
When dealing with large datasets, it can be easier and more efficient to separate duplicates using a temporary table before deleting them.
Step 1: Identifying Duplicates Using a Temporary Table
Using a temporary table to identify duplicates is the first step.
Make a temporary table to store duplicate groups according to predetermined standards (username,userEmail)
